operator/README.md, before:

<!-- TOC -->
- [PMEM-CSI Operator](#pmem-csi-for-kubernetes)
  - [About](#about)
  - [Usage](#usage)
    - [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites)
    - [Deploy PMEM-CSI operator](#deploy-pmem-csi-operator)
    - [Deployment CRD API](#deployment-crd-api)
    - [Driver certificates](#driver-certificates)
  - [Example Deployment](#example-deployment)

<!-- /TOC -->
# PMEM-CSI operator

## About

PMEM-CSI operator facilitates deploying and managing the [PMEM-CSI driver](https://github.com/intel/pmem-csi) on a Kubernetes cluster. 

This operator is based on the CoreOS [operator-sdk](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk) tools and APIs.

## Usage

### Pre-requisites

A running Kubernetes cluster with one or more nodes installed with PMEM hardware(NVDIMM). The persistent memory on these nodes must be [pre-provisioned](../README.md#persistent-memory-pre-provisioning).

### Deploy PMEM-CSI operator

<!-- The assumptions:
  a) pmem-csi-operator binary is part of released intel/pmem-csi-driver image and no additional steps required to build the images
-->
<!--
  TODOs: Changes to below URL
    1) Current url is referring to 'operator' branch. so, when moved to devel branch change the url accordingly: 'raw/operator' ->  'raw/devel'
    2) Though currently operator deployments are in 'REPO_ROOT/operator/deploy', they must moved to 'REPO_ROOT/deploy'. Then that change should reflect in this url : 'operator/deploy' -> '/deploy'
    3) In release branch, branch name part of the url should point to appropriate release branch name
-->
```sh
$ kubectl create -f https://github.com/intel/pmem-csi/raw/operator/operator/deploy/operator.yaml
```

### Deployment CRD API

`Deployment` is a cluster-scoped Kubernetes resource in `pmem-csi.intel.com` API group. Current PMEM-CSI Deployment object supports below API:

#### Deployment

|Field | type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| apiVersion | string  | `pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1`|
| kind | string | `Deployment`|
| metadata | [ObjectMeta](https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status) | Standard objects metadata |
| spec | [DeploymentSpec](#deployment-spec) | Specification of the desired behavior of the deployment |

#### DeploymentSpec

|Field | type | Description | Default Value |
|---|---|---|---|
| driverName | string | Unique CSI driver name to use | `pmem-csi.intel.com` |
| image | string | PMEM-CSI docker image name used for the deployment | the same version as the operator |
| provisionerImage | string | [CSI provisioner](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/external-provisioner.html) docker image name | latest [external provisioner](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/external-provisioner.html) stable release image<sup>1</sup> |
| registrarImage | string | [CSI node driver registrar](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/node-driver-registrar) docker image name | latest [node driver registrar](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/node-driver-registrar.html) stable release image<sup>1</sup> |
| pullPolicy | string | Docker image pull policy. either one of `Always`, `Never`, `IfNotPresent` | `IfNotPresent` |
| logLevel | integer | PMEM-CSI driver logging level | 3 |
| deviceMode | string | Device management mode to use. Supports one of `lvm` or `direct` | `lvm`
| controllerResources | [ResourceRequirements](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.12/#resourcerequirements-v1-core) | Describes the compute resource requirements for controller pod |
| nodeResources | [ResourceRequirements](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.12/#resourcerequirements-v1-core) | Describes the compute resource requirements for the pods running on node(s) |
| registryCert | string | Encoded tls certificate signed by a certificate authority used for driver's controller registry server | generated by operator self-signed CA |
| nodeControllerCert | string | Encoded tls certificate signed by a certificate authority used for driver's node controllers | generated by operator self-signed CA |
| registryKey | string | Encoded RSA private key used for signing by `registryCert` | generated by the operator |
| nodeControllerKey | string | Encoded RSA private key used for signing by `nodeControllerCert` | generated by the operator |
| caCert | string | Certificate of the CA by which the `registryCert` and `controllerCert` are signed | self-signed certificate generated by the operator |
| nodeSelector | string map | [Labels to use for selecting Nodes](../README.md#run-pmem-csi-on-kubernetes) on which PMEM-CSI driver should run. | `{ "storage": "pmem" }`|

<sup>1</sup> Image versions depend on the Kubernetes cluster version. The operator figures out itself the appropriate image version(s). Whereas users have to handle choosing the right version(s) themselves when overriding the values.

#### DeploymentStatus

A PMEM-CSI Deployment's `status` field is a `DeploymentStatus` object, which has
a `phase` field. The phase of a Deployment is high-level summary of where the
Deployment is in it's lifecycle.

The possible `phase` values and their meaning are as below:

| value | meaning |
|---|---|---|
| Initializing | The required sub-resources of the `Deployment` are being initialized |
| Running | All the required sub-resources of the `Deployment` are created. This does not mean that the deployed driver is fully ready to use, there might still possibility of failures. Reasons for such failures can be determined by looking into individual pod status |
| Failed | For some reason the state of the `Deployment` failed and cannot be progressed<sup>2</sup> |

<sup>2</sup> Failure reason is supposed to be carried by one of additional `DeploymentStatus` field, but not implemented yet.

### Driver certificates

All [PMEM-CSI driver communication is protected by mutual
TLS](../README.md#security) to ensure that malicious or compromised entities in
the cluster cannot interfere with its operation. So the driver deployment needs
to be provided with those certificates and corresponding private keys using appropriate fields in deployment specification. These encoded certificates and private keys are made available to driver pods via Kubernetes [secrets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) by the operator.

If the private keys and/or certificates data is missing in a deployment, the operator generates them using a self-signed CA.

**NOTE:** A production deployment that is not supposed to depend on the operator's self-signed CA instead must provide the certificates generated from a trusted certificate authority.

## Example Deployment

Once the [operator deployed](#deploy-PMEM-CSI-operator) is in `Running` state, it is ready to handle PMEM-CSI `Deployment` objects in `pmem-csi.intel.com` API group.

Here is an example driver deployment with custom driver image and pod resources:

```sh
$ kubectl create -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: pmem-deployment
spec:
  image: localhost/pmem-csi-driver:canary
  deviceMode: lvm
  controllerResources:
    requests:
      cpu: "200m"
      memory: "100Mi"
  nodeResources:
    requests:
      cpu: "200m"
      memory: "100Mi"
EOF
```

Once the above deployment installation is successful, we can see all the driver
pods in `Running` state:
```sh
$ kubectl get deployments.pmem-csi.intel.com
NAME                 AGE
pmem-deployment      50s

$ kubectl describe deployment.pmem-csi.intel.com pmem-deployment
Name:         pmem-deployment
Namespace:    default
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1
Kind:         Deployment
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-01-23T13:40:32Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    3596387
  Self Link:           /apis/pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1/deployments/pmem-deployment
  UID:                 454b5961-5aa2-41c3-b774-29fe932ae236
Spec:
  Controller Resources:
    Requests:
      Cpu:      200m
      Memory:   100Mi
  Device Mode:  lvm
  Image:        localhost/pmem-csi-driver:canary
  Node Resources:
    Requests:
      Cpu:     200m
      Memory:  100Mi
Status:
  Phase:  Running
Events:   <none>


$ kubectl get po
NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pmem-deployment-controller-0       2/2     Running   0          51s
pmem-deployment-node-4x7cv         2/2     Running   0          50s
pmem-deployment-node-6grt6         2/2     Running   0          50s
pmem-deployment-node-msgds         2/2     Running   0          51s
pmem-csi-operator-749c7c7c69-k5k8n 1/1     Running   0          3m
```

> **Note on multiple deployments**
>
> Though the operator allows running multiple PMEM-CSI driver deployments, one
> has to take extreme care of such deployments by ensuring that not more than
> one driver ends up running on the same node(s). Nodes on which a PMEM-CSI
> driver could run can be configured by using `nodeSelector` property of
> [`DeploymentSpec`](#deployment-crd-api).

Commit message:

operator: support for configuring LVM driver's PMEM usage space
Added new field `PmemPercentange` to Deployment spec, such that deployments
could choose how much spac a driver in LVM mode could use.

operator/README.md, after:

<!-- TOC -->
- [PMEM-CSI Operator](#pmem-csi-for-kubernetes)
  - [About](#about)
  - [Usage](#usage)
    - [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites)
    - [Deploy PMEM-CSI operator](#deploy-pmem-csi-operator)
    - [Deployment CRD API](#deployment-crd-api)
    - [Driver certificates](#driver-certificates)
  - [Example Deployment](#example-deployment)

<!-- /TOC -->
# PMEM-CSI operator

## About

PMEM-CSI operator facilitates deploying and managing the [PMEM-CSI driver](https://github.com/intel/pmem-csi) on a Kubernetes cluster. 

This operator is based on the CoreOS [operator-sdk](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk) tools and APIs.

## Usage

### Pre-requisites

A running Kubernetes cluster with one or more nodes installed with PMEM hardware(NVDIMM). The persistent memory on these nodes must be [pre-provisioned](../README.md#persistent-memory-pre-provisioning).

### Deploy PMEM-CSI operator

<!-- The assumptions:
  a) pmem-csi-operator binary is part of released intel/pmem-csi-driver image and no additional steps required to build the images
-->
<!--
  TODOs: Changes to below URL
    1) Current url is referring to 'operator' branch. so, when moved to devel branch change the url accordingly: 'raw/operator' ->  'raw/devel'
    2) Though currently operator deployments are in 'REPO_ROOT/operator/deploy', they must moved to 'REPO_ROOT/deploy'. Then that change should reflect in this url : 'operator/deploy' -> '/deploy'
    3) In release branch, branch name part of the url should point to appropriate release branch name
-->
```sh
$ kubectl create -f https://github.com/intel/pmem-csi/raw/operator/operator/deploy/operator.yaml
```

### Deployment CRD API

`Deployment` is a cluster-scoped Kubernetes resource in `pmem-csi.intel.com` API group. Current PMEM-CSI Deployment object supports below API:

#### Deployment

|Field | type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| apiVersion | string  | `pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1`|
| kind | string | `Deployment`|
| metadata | [ObjectMeta](https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status) | Standard objects metadata |
| spec | [DeploymentSpec](#deployment-spec) | Specification of the desired behavior of the deployment |

#### DeploymentSpec

|Field | type | Description | Default Value |
|---|---|---|---|
| driverName | string | Unique CSI driver name to use | `pmem-csi.intel.com` |
| image | string | PMEM-CSI docker image name used for the deployment | the same version as the operator |
| provisionerImage | string | [CSI provisioner](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/external-provisioner.html) docker image name | latest [external provisioner](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/external-provisioner.html) stable release image<sup>1</sup> |
| registrarImage | string | [CSI node driver registrar](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/node-driver-registrar) docker image name | latest [node driver registrar](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/node-driver-registrar.html) stable release image<sup>1</sup> |
| pullPolicy | string | Docker image pull policy. either one of `Always`, `Never`, `IfNotPresent` | `IfNotPresent` |
| logLevel | integer | PMEM-CSI driver logging level | 3 |
| deviceMode | string | Device management mode to use. Supports one of `lvm` or `direct` | `lvm`
| controllerResources | [ResourceRequirements](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.12/#resourcerequirements-v1-core) | Describes the compute resource requirements for controller pod |
| nodeResources | [ResourceRequirements](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.12/#resourcerequirements-v1-core) | Describes the compute resource requirements for the pods running on node(s) |
| registryCert | string | Encoded tls certificate signed by a certificate authority used for driver's controller registry server | generated by operator self-signed CA |
| nodeControllerCert | string | Encoded tls certificate signed by a certificate authority used for driver's node controllers | generated by operator self-signed CA |
| registryKey | string | Encoded RSA private key used for signing by `registryCert` | generated by the operator |
| nodeControllerKey | string | Encoded RSA private key used for signing by `nodeControllerCert` | generated by the operator |
| caCert | string | Certificate of the CA by which the `registryCert` and `controllerCert` are signed | self-signed certificate generated by the operator |
| nodeSelector | string map | [Labels to use for selecting Nodes](../README.md#run-pmem-csi-on-kubernetes) on which PMEM-CSI driver should run. | `{ "storage": "pmem" }`|
| pmemPercentage | integer | Percentage of PMEM space to be used by the driver on each node. This is only valid for a driver deployed in `lvm` mode. This field cannot be changed of a running deployment. | 100 |

<sup>1</sup> Image versions depend on the Kubernetes cluster version. The operator figures out itself the appropriate image version(s). Whereas users have to handle choosing the right version(s) themselves when overriding the values.

#### DeploymentStatus

A PMEM-CSI Deployment's `status` field is a `DeploymentStatus` object, which has
a `phase` field. The phase of a Deployment is high-level summary of where the
Deployment is in it's lifecycle.

The possible `phase` values and their meaning are as below:

| value | meaning |
|---|---|---|
| Initializing | The required sub-resources of the `Deployment` are being initialized |
| Running | All the required sub-resources of the `Deployment` are created. This does not mean that the deployed driver is fully ready to use, there might still possibility of failures. Reasons for such failures can be determined by looking into individual pod status |
| Failed | For some reason the state of the `Deployment` failed and cannot be progressed<sup>2</sup> |

<sup>2</sup> Failure reason is supposed to be carried by one of additional `DeploymentStatus` field, but not implemented yet.

### Driver certificates

All [PMEM-CSI driver communication is protected by mutual
TLS](../README.md#security) to ensure that malicious or compromised entities in
the cluster cannot interfere with its operation. So the driver deployment needs
to be provided with those certificates and corresponding private keys using appropriate fields in deployment specification. These encoded certificates and private keys are made available to driver pods via Kubernetes [secrets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) by the operator.

If the private keys and/or certificates data is missing in a deployment, the operator generates them using a self-signed CA.

**NOTE:** A production deployment that is not supposed to depend on the operator's self-signed CA instead must provide the certificates generated from a trusted certificate authority.

## Example Deployment

Once the [operator deployed](#deploy-PMEM-CSI-operator) is in `Running` state, it is ready to handle PMEM-CSI `Deployment` objects in `pmem-csi.intel.com` API group.

Here is an example driver deployment with custom driver image and pod resources:

```sh
$ kubectl create -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: pmem-deployment
spec:
  image: localhost/pmem-csi-driver:canary
  deviceMode: lvm
  controllerResources:
    requests:
      cpu: "200m"
      memory: "100Mi"
  nodeResources:
    requests:
      cpu: "200m"
      memory: "100Mi"
EOF
```

Once the above deployment installation is successful, we can see all the driver
pods in `Running` state:
```sh
$ kubectl get deployments.pmem-csi.intel.com
NAME                 AGE
pmem-deployment      50s

$ kubectl describe deployment.pmem-csi.intel.com pmem-deployment
Name:         pmem-deployment
Namespace:    default
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1
Kind:         Deployment
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2020-01-23T13:40:32Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    3596387
  Self Link:           /apis/pmem-csi.intel.com/v1alpha1/deployments/pmem-deployment
  UID:                 454b5961-5aa2-41c3-b774-29fe932ae236
Spec:
  Controller Resources:
    Requests:
      Cpu:      200m
      Memory:   100Mi
  Device Mode:  lvm
  Image:        localhost/pmem-csi-driver:canary
  Node Resources:
    Requests:
      Cpu:     200m
      Memory:  100Mi
Status:
  Phase:  Running
Events:   <none>


$ kubectl get po
NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pmem-deployment-controller-0       2/2     Running   0          51s
pmem-deployment-node-4x7cv         2/2     Running   0          50s
pmem-deployment-node-6grt6         2/2     Running   0          50s
pmem-deployment-node-msgds         2/2     Running   0          51s
pmem-csi-operator-749c7c7c69-k5k8n 1/1     Running   0          3m
```

> **Note on multiple deployments**
>
> Though the operator allows running multiple PMEM-CSI driver deployments, one
> has to take extreme care of such deployments by ensuring that not more than
> one driver ends up running on the same node(s). Nodes on which a PMEM-CSI
> driver could run can be configured by using `nodeSelector` property of
> [`DeploymentSpec`](#deployment-crd-api).
